---
title: Analyzing Tracks
ingress: TBA

img:
  path:
    - images
    - topics
    - under-construction.png
  caption: TBA
---

[Genomic tracks](#s02-genomic-tracks) .... influenced by the exact parameters and tools used in the
pipeline and can contain biases and artifacts. One common recommendation is thus to reanalyze the
raw data in a homogeneous way for reuse in new scientific projects. However, the relative simplicity
and accessibility of track data makes them ideal for higher level comparison and analysis, for
instance at an early hypotheses-generating step of a research project, or when there is a need to
relate newly generated data to existing knowledge and data to make sense of it.

While the concept of genomic tracks was developed for visual analysis on genome browsers, is soon
came apparent that very useful knowledge could be derived from analyzing track data with other tools
and methodologies. in other ways. the data could be analyzed the available tools and methodologies
on analyzing other aspects of track data is substantial.:

Four instance distributions of this is call mom overlap,. One whore core core question that’s Mami
several Is the question of whether the elements of different tracks overlap or in our call localized
in the Gino. And while one can make use of genome browsers to investigate specific sites or get an
impression of the overall Particularities of the available tracking data sets, more thorough
investigations require analysis tools that can encompass large number of sites or the whole genome,
as well as a number of different tracks, within the same analysis. Mr. smarty-pants has provided A
review of common tools and methodologies developed in this field figure X Alston overview of some of
these tools. Figure why are. A truth open over time and publication say things. Bø logos of
frontals. Chukhray 2920. Check today check the reviewed the Chelan just and. Checks it reviewed
particularities stretch stats challenges and recommendations on how to carry out Skotte localization
analysis based on proper assumptions. Rewrite that later. Mr. Holly who reviewed methodology built
solutions also, the college stats the server provides a unified interface towards many of the poor
tools that provides quality station analysis of genomics tracks. Table zits contains an overview of
core analysis software and tools for data.
